# Location Based Services and Geo-Information Engineering

## Source
This notes summarize relevant chapters from book "Location Based Services and Geo-Information Engineering". Details about book are in bibtex file in latex documentation folder.

## Chapter 6.5
Short range positioning technologies cover small areas and are frequently employed for positioning in indoor environments. Most popular technologies are WiFi and Bluetooth, which are most commonly used to determine proximity location of mobile device connected to network. Other available technologies are Radio Frequency Identification (RDIF), Ultra Wide Band Positioning, ultrasonic positioning, infrared positioning, camera-assisted and sensor-assisted positioning. 

### WiFi-Based Positioning
The basic principle of using WiFi for indoor positioning is measuring strength of signals received at two or more access points. The signals used for positioning are called beacon frames and are primarily intended for announcing the presence of a wireless LAN. There are two ways of transmitting these signals for positioning, uplink, when beacon frames are generated by mobile device and downlink, where beacon frames are generated by access points.
Actual positioning can be done in three ways. The simplest method is determining position of mobile device from position of the access point with the strongest signal, which is the closest to the mobile device. In this case a data linking access points and their locations is needed. The second method uses signal strength data from multiple access points to calculate the position of mobile device. This method provides more accurate position data. Third method uses fingerprinting approach, in which position is determined by matching signal data on mobile device against set of pre-collected data on signal strengths across the area. This approach offer the best results, but it requires initial measurement of the area before position tracking can take place.
WiFi based positioning only works in areas with good wireless network coverage. It is most commonly used in closed spaces such as offices, airports, cafes, shopping markets, hotels etc. It can also be used for outdoor positioning, usually in dense populated urban areas. 
In general, WiFi positioning provides a proximity location instead of more specific coordinates. For example, it may provide information, in which building, floor and room mobile device is located. Using WiFi positioning there is no need for additional infrastructure, except for existing WiFi network and positioning server with database of all available access point along with their positions.

### Bluetooth technology used for positioning
Various solutions have been developed using Bluetooth for short range positioning. Bluetooth enabled devices are able to transmit signals containing information such as device identity and profile. When mobile device is in short range of device transmitting its location it can pick up such signals and use them for positioning. Signals can also be processed to determine the position of device, especially in case when mobile device can receive multiple signals from different devices. Position data can be exchanged between mobile devices using ad-hoc Bluetooth networks or with the location server in the network. 
The signal strength decreases logarithmically with distance. This property can be used for calculating position. One method of positioning device is to triangulate data from different devices. This method offers higher accuracy than just detecting the closest device in range.
Bluetooth positioning can be deployed rapidly with easy maintenance and low cost. It can be used in applications where approximate positioning is sufficient. 